---
title: Tutorial 12
date: 2019-04-09
categories: ELEC 321
use_math: true
---

TODO: Fixed required

- toc
{:toc}

Suppose we have the Markov chains $X_n$. The **Markov property** is $\mathbb P(X_{n+1}|X_n, X_{n+1},\dotsc)=\mathbb P(X_{n+1}|X_n)$.

For homogeneous MC, the *initial probability distribution* is $p_i(0)=\mathbb P(X_0=i)$, and that $\sum_i p_i=1$.

**Chapman-Kolmogrov Equation**
$$
\begin{align}
p(n)=(\mathbb p_1(n)\dotsc p_s(n))\\
p(n+1)=p(n)p\\
p(n)=p(0)p^n
\end{align}
$$
**Example**

There exists 2 white balls and 2 black balls. At each time, one ball is drawn and the color is flipped with probability $a$, and not flipped with probability 1-$a$. Ball is placed back into the urn.

Let $X_n$ be the number of black balls in the urn.

**a.	Is $X_n$ a Markov chain?**

There are five possible outcomes for $X_n$: $X_n\in\{0,1,2,3,4\}$. Let $X_n=k$, so $k$ is the number of black balls. Then 
$$
X_{n+1}=\begin{cases}
k,&\text{if white or black ball is taken but no color change}\\
k+1 & \text{if white ball is taken and color changes}\\
k-1 & \text{if black ball is taken and color changes}
\end{cases}
$$
Since we have shown that $X_{n+1}$ only depends on the last value, $k=X_n$. Then $X_n$ is a Markov chain.

**b.	Find the transition matrix**

Let the rows be the number of black balls the transition is 'from' and the column be the number of black balls the transition is going 'to'. 

If there are 0 black balls to begin with. Then there are two cases: 

- a white ball is picked and no color changes
- a white ball is picked and color changes (black balls + 1)

If there are 1 black ball in the urn. There are these outcomes:

- a black ball is picked and color changes

  Thus, $P_{10}=\mathbb P(\text{pick black ball and changes color})$. Since picking and changing color are independent, $P_{10}=\mathbb P(\text{pick black})\mathbb P(\text{change color})$. Which is $\frac{1}{4}\times a$.

- Similarly, using the steps for the black ball above, the probability of picking the white ball and changing color is just $\frac{3}{4}\times a$. 

- Picking any colored ball and not change color contributes to the same transition.

  - For picking a black ball and not change color, the probability is `...`
  - Picking a white ball and not change color, the probability is `...`

  The sum of the two above adds up to $1-a$.

Using the same arguments for the other states, we come to the final matrix:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1-a &a & 0&0&0\\
\frac a4 & 1-a & \frac{3a}{4} & 0 &0\\
0 & \frac{a}{2} & 1-a & \frac{a}{2} & 0\\
0 & 0 & \frac{3a}{4} & 1-a & \frac{a}{4}\\
0 & 0 & 0 & a & 1-a
\end{bmatrix}
$$

## Classes of State

**Accessibility**: State $j$ is accessible from $i$ if and only if $\exists n \in \mathbb N, p_{ij}>0$

**Communicating State**: States $i$ and $j$ communicate if and only if $i$ is accessible from $j$ and $j$ is accessible from $i$.

**Communicating Class**: The set of all communicating states.

**Irreducible**: A state is irreducible if and only if all states in the state space belongs to a single communicating class.

**Recurrence**: The state $i$ is recurring if and only if the probability of visiting state $i$ is 1.

​	To check, consider: $\sum_{n=1}^\infty p_{ii}(n)=\infty$

**Transient**: The state $i$ is transient if and only if the probability of visiting state $i$ is less than 1.

​	To check, consider: $\sum_{n=1}^\infty p_{ii}(n)<\infty$

### Properties

1. State machine is *irreducible* if and only if all states are recurrent
2. All states in a communicating class are either *transient* or *recurring* (if one state in a communicating class is transient, all of the states in the same class are)

---

**Example**

Given transition matrix
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
0 & 1 & 0\\
0.5 & 0 & 0.5\\
1 & 0 &0
\end{bmatrix}
$$
Let's draw the state diagram.



Since 1 is accessible from 0 and 0 is accessible from 1, then $1,0\in \mathcal C$. Since 2 is also accessible from any of the states and any state is accessible from 2 given some time, we see that $2\in\mathcal C$ also.

Thus $\mathcal C=\{0,1,2\}$.

**Example**

Given transition matrix
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 &0\\
0&0&1\\
0&1&0
\end{bmatrix}
$$
We see that 0 is not communicating with any state but itself, and that 1 and 2 are communicating amongst each other. Thus we have two communicating classes: $\mathcal C_1=\{0\},\mathcal C_2=\{1,2\}$.

We see that both communicating classes are recurrent.

**Example**

Given transition matrix
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
0.5 & 0.5 &0\\
0&1&0\\
0.5&0&0.5
\end{bmatrix}
$$
We see that none of the states are communicating except for themselves:
$$
\mathcal C_1=\{0\},\quad\mathcal C_2=\{1\},\quad\mathcal C_3=\{2\}
$$
To check if state 0 is transient, we check $\sum_{n=1}^\infty p_{00}(n) <\infty$:
$$
\begin{align}
p_{00}(1)&=\frac{1}{2}\\
p_{00}(2)&=\frac{1}{2}\frac{1}{2}=\frac{1}{4}\\
p_{00}(3)&=\frac{1}{8}\\
\vdots
\end{align}
$$
If we take the sum, it converges to $1<\infty$. Therefore state 0 is transient.

Similarity, we could argue that state 2 is also transient.

For state 1, if we end up in state 1, the only outcome after is state 1. Therefore state 1 is recurring. We can check this by taking the summation: $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}p_{11}(n)=\sum_{n=1}^\infty(1)=\infty$.



## Periodicity of a State

Given a Markov chain, the period $d_i$ of a state is defined as
$$
d_i=\gcd(\{n_i\in\mathbb N,i\in\mathbb N:p_{ii}(n_i)>0\})
$$

### Properties

1. All states in a communicating class has the same period
2. A state is aperiodic if there exists a class, where all states in the class have a period of 1. From property 1, we see that if one state in the class has a period of 1, then all of the other states in the same class also has a period of 1. Thus it will make the class aperiodic.
3. **Regular**: a Markov chain is regular if and only if it is irreducible and aperiodic

**Example**

`copy diagram`

All states belong to the same communicating class: $\mathcal C=\{0,1,2,3\}$ and we only need to find the period of one state to determine the period of the entire class.

Observe the period of from state 0 to state 0. We see that $p_{00}(1)=0,p_{00}(2)=0.5,p_{00}(3)=0,p_{00}(4)=0.75$. Thus the period is $d_0=\gcd(n=2,n=4)=2$.

**Example**

Given transition matrix
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
0 & 1 & 0\\
0 & 0 & 1\\
1 & 0 & 0
\end{bmatrix}
$$
We see that this is not regular because its one and only communicating class is periodic.

## Long-Run Behavior

This only applies to **regular** Markov chains.

Doesn't matter what the starting state is, after a long time, the probability approaches to a certain probability - the **steady state probability**.

Suppose we start the chain at state $i$, then $\mathbb P(X_n=j | X_o=i)=\pi_j>0$

$\pi$ can be obtained as a solution of $\pi=\pi P$

**Example**

Given a 2 state MC with the transition matrix
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
1-a & a\\
b & 1-b
\end{bmatrix}
$$
We first check that this MC is regular, and indeed it is.

To compute the steady state probability, $\pi=\pi P$:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}\pi_1 &\pi_2\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}\pi_1 &\pi_2\end{bmatrix}\times\begin{bmatrix}1-a & a \\ b & 1-b\end{bmatrix}\\
$$
We obtain the equations and solve for $\pi_1,\pi_2$. Alas, we get $\pi_1=\frac{b}{a+b}$ and $\pi_2=\frac{a}{a+b}$.

Suppose that $p(0)=\begin{bmatrix}0.5 &0.5\end{bmatrix}$ and $a=0.3, b=0.8$. Compute the probability at $n=2$. 

Because $p(n)=p(0)p^n$ we have $p(2)=\begin{bmatrix}0.5 & 0.5\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}0.7 & 0.2\\ 0.8 & 0.2\end{bmatrix}^2$.

Multiplying them out using preferred methods, we see that $p(2)=\begin{bmatrix}0.725 & 0.275\end{bmatrix}$.



**Example**

Given a buffer

At $t=0$, the buffer contains 3 packets. Assume no more packet arrives, the packets in the buffer is transmitted. Transmission is successful with probability $p$. 

Let $Y_n$ denote the number of packets in the buffer.

**a. 	Is $Y_n$ a MC?**

There are four outcomes: $Y_n\in\{0,1,2,3\}$

Let $Y_n=k$, we see that $Y_{n+1}\in\{k, k-1\}$, thus $Y_{n+1}$ only depends on $k$ and therefore $Y_n$ is a Markov chain.

The transition matrix is
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0 & 0\\
p & 1-p & 0 & 0\\
0 & p & 1-p & 0\\
0 & 0 & p & 1-p
\end{bmatrix}
$$
It is not regular because all states don't belong to a single communicating class.













